docs: add open-by-design section and expand vision properties (#24)
complytime/complytime: docs/vision.md

## The Goal

> Compliance assessment that is automated, continuous, distributed, and trustworthy, from the authority document through evaluation to the audit artifact across the entire enterprise.

Reviewer: I would vote to keep the original structure, but keep "distributed". "Across entire enterprise" is vague and makes me understand this less.

```suggestion
Compliance assessment becomes automated, continuous, distributed, and trustworthy because the manual approach does not scale to the pace of modern infrastructure, the breadth of regulatory surface area, and the number of teams that need to participate.
```

Because the requirement identity is decoupled from the evaluator, ComplyTime supports **multi-evaluator mapping**: a legacy evaluator and a modern evaluator can run side-by-side against the same requirement, verifying output parity before cutover. Migration becomes gradual and verifiable rather than a risky rewrite. The requirement's identity, evidence chain, and compliance posture remain continuous regardless of which evaluator is replaced underneath. See [Evaluator Coupling](problems/evaluator-coupling.md) for the problem this addresses.

**Platform composability.** The platform itself is composed of replaceable components that integrate through well-defined interfaces and public formats. Components function as a cohesive system, but any component can be replaced as technology evolves, and the platform integrates with existing tools rather than requiring organizations to abandon them. Distinct from compliance posture composability (above): that property governs how policies layer; this one governs how the platform is built.

> ## Properties

Reviewer 2: The rename from `Principles` to `Properties` caught my attention. In the context of a vision document, I think principles are actually more valuable than properties.

Principles are the foundational beliefs that guide decisions. They help someone reason about situations the document doesn't explicitly cover. Properties are the observable outcomes that emerge when you apply those principles correctly.

I understand the way they were expressed looks like more as properties than principles, but we should have both to make the vision stronger. It would also make the section more durable since principles rarely change, while properties may evolve as the design matures.

Not blocking this PR, but worth considering as a follow-up. It would be great to have all properties grounded by the principles.

Author: I'll freely admit that malleable aspects of systems that can't be measured aren't my strong suit :sweat_smile:

- **Decoupling**: Requirements (what must be true) and verification logic (how to check it) have independent lifecycles and independent authorship. Neither should be locked to a single tool.
- **Composability**: Compliance postures compose from reusable components. Layering, overrides, and conflict resolution are explicit and traceable.
- **Evidence as a first-class artifact**: Assessment results, collected data, and audit artifacts are structured, queryable, and traceable to the requirement they address.
- **Provenance**: Every link in the chain (authority document to requirement to check to evidence to finding) is auditable.

## Open by Design

Openness in ComplyTime is a structural requirement of the compliance domain, not a licensing preference. Closed compliance tooling has a poor track record. An architecture built on open, evolvable foundations can adapt as the problem space matures, while a proprietary model bets that one vendor's view of compliance is the right one forever.

The project operates across three layers, each with its own relationship to openness:

### Open infrastructure

> Compliance tooling depends on schemas, transport formats, and plugin interfaces. When these are proprietary, every consumer is locked to one vendor's model of what compliance looks like. ComplyTime builds on community-governed schemas ([Gemara][gemara] under [OpenSSF][openssf]), industry-standard distribution ([OCI registries][oci]), and open plugin boundaries ([gRPC][grpc]) so that the foundation layer is owned by no one and available to everyone.

Reviewer 2: Instead of "owned by no one" I would say it is owned by Open Source communities:
`so that the foundation layer is owned by Open Source Communities and and available to everyone.`

Author: I'm going to disagree on this one. There may (and probably will) be components that are not open source that play into realizations of an infrastructure.

I suppose this is more about open standards than open source in reality. Perhaps the header is misleading?

### Open-collaborative interpretation

> The hardest part of compliance is not the tooling. It is agreeing on what a requirement means in practice. When interpretation is siloed (per-vendor, per-team, per-agency), the same control gets implemented dozens of different ways, each with its own gaps and blind spots. The interpretation layer (shared catalogs, reference assessment content, aligned profiles) must be a collaborative space. Industry groups, government agencies, divisions within an enterprise, or cross-organizational working groups can converge on interpretations that carry legitimacy precisely because they are built in the open. No single vendor can credibly own this layer.

Reviewer 2: It would be good to be specific about the "interpretation layer" being Gemara, a standardized format where everyone can effectively collaborate.

Author: That's in the Open Infrastructure section.

> The hardest part of compliance is not the tooling. It is agreeing on what a requirement means in practice. When interpretation is siloed (per-vendor, per-team, per-agency), the same control gets implemented dozens of different ways, each with its own gaps and blind spots. The interpretation layer (shared catalogs, reference assessment content, aligned profiles) must be a collaborative space. Industry groups, government agencies, divisions within an enterprise, or cross-organizational working groups can converge on interpretations that carry legitimacy precisely because they are built in the open. No single vendor can credibly own this layer.

Reviewer 2: I am also reflecting on `No single vendor can credibly own this layer.`. If we put this in context of Gemara, I can see a scenario where authorities own their Gemara artifacts in Guidance layers, for example. The same as vendors can own content specific for their products on catalog layer. I think I understood what was the idea of this paragraph as something more high-level. Maybe we only need to change the wording a bit to avoid misinterpretation.

Author: I'm honestly not sure what to change it to.

The subject was the shared interpretation layer with the premise that no single entity can own interpretation successfully at scale but that it should all be captured and shared if possible.

Because the requirement identity is decoupled from the evaluator, ComplyTime supports **multi-evaluator mapping** — a legacy evaluator and a modern evaluator can run side-by-side against the same requirement, verifying output parity before cutover. Migration becomes gradual and verifiable rather than a risky rewrite. The requirement's identity, evidence chain, and compliance posture remain continuous regardless of which evaluator is replaced underneath. See [Evaluator Coupling](problems/evaluator-coupling.md) for the problem this addresses.

## Properties

> These properties are not novel. Model-based systems engineering (MBSE) has validated them over decades in domains where traceability, lifecycle management, and verification rigor are non-negotiable: aerospace, defense, critical infrastructure. ComplyTime's architecture draws from the same structural patterns: requirements modeled at the source, verification defined independently from design, evidence collected and traced as a first-class concern. The compliance and systems engineering communities have evolved separately, but the problems they solve share a common shape. Recognizing that alignment, rather than reinventing the solutions, is a deliberate choice and treats modern IT systems as the critical infrastructure that they actually are.

Reviewer: I would counter that properties came from working through the compliance domain's actual problems. If they align with MBSE practices, that's encouraging, but the paragraph reads like we derived them from MBSE because it leads with that concept. I think they're strong enough to stand on their own. I think readers who come from a systems engineering background will notice the alignment without us claiming it.

Author: Ah, the point of this phrasing was to (politely) help the Compliance industry understand that these are actually largely solved problems, we just haven't been applying the principles in the IT world outside of a few spaces. I haven't found anything novel in the compliance space yet after 20 years (it also took me a while to realize this).

Reviewer: Maybe flipping the sections could help. Let me see if I can make a concrete suggestion now that I know what you are trying to accomplish.

Author: I'll remove this for now and add it  as a separate PR for explicit discussion.

Any solution in this space must exhibit:

- **Fidelity**: Machine-evaluable requirements must faithfully represent the source authority. Precision cannot come at the cost of accuracy.
- **Decoupling**: Requirements (what must be true) and verification logic (how to check it) have independent lifecycles and independent authorship. Neither should be locked to a single tool.
- **Composability**: Compliance postures compose from reusable components. Layering, overrides, and conflict resolution are explicit and traceable.
- **Evidence as a first-class artifact**: Assessment results, collected data, and audit artifacts are structured, queryable, and traceable to the requirement they address.
- **Provenance**: Every link in the chain (authority document to requirement to check to evidence to finding) is auditable.

> - **Platform composability**: The platform itself is composed of replaceable components that integrate through well-defined interfaces and public formats. Components function as a cohesive system, but any component can be replaced as technology evolves, and the platform integrates with existing tools rather than requiring organizations to abandon them. Distinct from compliance posture composability (above): that property governs how policies layer; this one governs how the platform is built.

Reviewer: The first five properties describe what any compliance solution should exhibit regardless of how it's built. This one describes how ComplyTime chooses to be built, which is important, but it might fit better in the "How" section alongside the existing architectural decisions.

Author: @jpower432 I went back and forth on this and decided that it would probably ground LLMs better in this section as an immutable rule target. Thoughts?

Reviewer: That seems reasonable. We can leave it here for now.

### Open-collaborative interpretation

The hardest part of compliance is not the tooling. It is agreeing on what a requirement means in practice. When interpretation is siloed (per-vendor, per-team, per-agency), the same control gets implemented dozens of different ways, each with its own gaps and blind spots. The interpretation layer (shared catalogs, reference assessment content, aligned profiles) must be a collaborative space. Industry groups, government agencies, divisions within an enterprise, or cross-organizational working groups can converge on interpretations that carry legitimacy precisely because they are built in the open. No single vendor can credibly own this layer.

### Private composition

An organization's specific policies, tailored profiles, assessment overrides, and evidence stores are private by nature. But because they are built on the open layers below, they remain portable. An organization can change tooling, switch providers, or bring assessment in-house without losing its compliance posture. The open foundation guarantees that private investment is never stranded.

> ### What most compliance tooling gets wrong

Reviewer: The evaluator-coupling problem doc already makes this argument with more specificity. I'd either move this content there to enrich it, or replace this section with a one-sentence forward reference.

Author: I'll add a link. I was trying to keep the vision doc self-contained so that folks could get the "at a glance" view.

Reviewer: Sounds good. I think a short summary and link might accomplish that.
